<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<title>Using Pass-By-Copy in Foolscap</title>
<style src="stylesheet-unprocessed.css"></style>
</head>

<body>
<h1>Using Pass-By-Copy in Foolscap</h1>


<p>Certain objects (including subclasses of <code
class="API">foolscap.Copyable</code> and things for which an <code
class="API" base="foolscap.copyable">ICopyable</code> adapter has been
registered) are serialized using copy-by-value semantics. Each such object is
serialized as a (copytype, state) pair of values. On the receiving end, the
"copytype" is looked up in a table to find a suitable deserializer. The
"state" information is passed to this deserializer to create a new instance
that corresponds to the original. Note that the sending and receiving ends
are under no obligation to use the same class on each side: it is fairly
common for the remote form of an object to have different methods than the
original instance.</p>

<p>Copy-by-value (as opposed to copy-by-reference) means that the remote
representation of an object leads an independent existence, unconnected to
the original. Sending the same object multiple times will result in separate
independent copies. Sending the result of a pass-by-copy operation back to
the original sender will, at best, result in the sender holding two separate
objects containing similar state (and at worst will not work at all: not all
RemoteCopies are themselves Copyable).</p>

<p>More complex copy semantics can be accomplished by writing custom Slicer
code. For example, to get an object that is copied by value the first time it
traverses the wire, and then copied by reference all later times, you will
need to write a Slicer/Unslicer pair to implement this functionality.
Likewise the oldpb <code>Cacheable</code> class would need to be implemented
with a custom Slicer/Unslicer pair.</p>

<h2>Copyable</h2>

<p>The easiest way to send your own classes over the wire is to use
<code>Copyable</code>. On the sending side, this requires two things: your
class must inherit from <code class="API">foolscap.Copyable</code>, and it
must define an attribute named <code>typeToCopy</code> with a unique string.
This copytype string is shared between both sides, so it is a good idea to
use a stable and globally unique value: perhaps a URL rooted in a namespace
that you control, or a UUID, or perhaps the fully-qualified
package+module+class name of the class being serialized. Any string will do,
as long as it matches the one used on the receiving side.</p>

<p>The object being sent is asked to provide a state dictionary by calling
its <code class="API"
base="foolscap.copyable.ICopyable">getStateToCopy</code> method. The default
implementation of <code>getStateToCopy</code> will simply return
<code>self.__dict__</code>. You can override <code>getStateToCopy</code> to
control what pieces of the source object get copied to the target. In
particular, you may want to override <code>getStateToCopy</code> if there is
any portion of the object's state that should <b>not</b> be sent over the
wire: references to objects that can not or should not be serialized, or
things that are private to the application. It is common practice to create
an empty dictionary in this method and then copy items into it.</p>

<p>On the receiving side, you must register the copytype and provide a
function to deserialize the state dictionary back into an instance. For each
<code>Copyable</code> subclass you will create a corresponding <code
class="API" base="foolscap">RemoteCopy</code> subclass. There are three
requirements which must be fulfilled by this subclass:</p>

<ol>
  <li><code>copytype</code>: Each <code>RemoteCopy</code> needs a
  <code>copytype</code> attribute which contains the same string as the
  corresponding <code>Copyable</code>'s <code>typeToCopy</code> attribute.
  (metaclass magic is used to auto-register the <code>RemoteCopy</code> class
  in the global copytype-to-RemoteCopy table when the class is defined. You
  can also use <code class="API">foolscap.registerRemoteCopy</code> to
  manually register a class).</li>

  <li><code>__init__</code>: The <code>RemoteCopy</code> subclass must have
  an __init__ method that takes no arguments. When the receiving side is
  creating the incoming object, it starts by creating a new instance of the
  correct <code>RemoteCopy</code> subclass, and at this point it has no
  arguments to work with. Later, once the instance is created, it will
  call <code>setCopyableState</code> to populate it.</li>

  <li><code>setCopyableState</code>: Your <code>RemoteCopy</code> subclass
  must define a method named <code class="API"
  base="foolscap.copyable.IRemoteCopy">setCopyableState</code>. This method
  will be called with the state dictionary that came out of
  <code>getStateToCopy</code> on the sending side, and is expected to set any
  necessary internal state.</li>
</ol>


<p>Note that <code>RemoteCopy</code> is a new-style class: if you want your
copies to be old-style classes, inherit from <code>RemoteCopyOldStyle</code>
and manually register the copytype-to-subclass mapping with
<code>registerRemoteCopy</code>.</p>

<a href="listings/copyable-send.py" class="py-listing" skipLines="2">copyable-send.py</a>
<a href="listings/copyable-receive.py" class="py-listing" skipLines="2">copyable-receive.py</a>


<h2>Registering Copiers to serialize third-party classes</h2>

<p>If you wish to serialize instances of third-party classes that are out of
your control (or you simply want to avoid subclassing), you can register a
Copier to provide serialization mechanisms for those instances.</p>

<p>There are plenty of cases where it is difficult to arrange for all of the
data you send over the wire to be in the form of <code>Copyable</code>
subclasses. For example, you might have a codebase that produces a
deeply-nested data structure that contains instances of pre-existing classes.
Those classes are written by other people, and do not happen to inherit from
<code>Copyable</code>. Without Copiers, you would have to traverse the whole
structure, locate all instances of these non-<code>Copyable</code> classes,
and wrap them in some new <code>Copyable</code> subclass. Registering a
Copier for the third-party class is much easier.</p>


<p>The <code class="API" base="foolscap.copyable">registerCopier</code>
function is used to provide a "copier" for any given class. This copier is a
function that accepts an instance of the given class, and returns a
(copytype, state) tuple. For example<span class="footnote">many thanks to
Ricky Iacovou for the xmlrpclib.DateTime example</span>, the xmlrpclib module
provides a <code>DateTime</code> class, and you might have a data structure
that includes some instances of them:</p>

<pre class="python">
import xmlrpclib
from foolscap import registerCopier

def copy_DateTime(xd):
    return ("_xmlrpclib_DateTime", {"value": xd.value})

registerCopier(xmlrpclib.DateTime, copy_DateTime)
</pre>

<p>This insures that any <code>xmlrpclib.DateTime</code> that is encountered
while serializing arguments or return values will be serialized with a
copytype of "_xmlrpclib_DateTime" and a state dictionary containing the
single "value" key. Even <code>DateTime</code> instances that appear
arbitrarily deep inside nested data structures will be serialized this way.
For example, one a method argument might be dictionary, and one of its keys
was a list, and that list could containe a <code>DateTime</code>
instance.</p>

<p>To deserialize this object, the receiving side needs to register a
corresponding deserializer. <code class="API"
base="foolscap.copyable">registerRemoteCopyFactory</code> is the
receiving-side parallel to <code>registerCopier</code>. It associates a
copytype with a function that will receive a state dictionary and is expected
to return a fully-formed instance. For example:</p>

<pre class="python">
import xmlrpclib
from foolscap import registerRemoteCopyFactory

def make_DateTime(state):
    return xmlrpclib.DateTime(state["value"])

registerRemoteCopyFactory("_xmlrpclib_DateTime", make_DateTime)
</pre>

<p>Note that the "_xmlrpclib_DateTime" copytype <b>must</b> be the same for
both the copier and the RemoteCopyFactory, otherwise the receiving side will
be unable to locate the correct deserializer.</p>

<p>It is perfectly reasonable to include both of these function/registration
pairs in the same module, and import it in the code on both sides of the
wire. The examples describe the sending and receiving sides separately to
emphasize the fact that the recipient may be running completely different
code than the sender.</p>


<h2>Registering ICopyable adapters</h2>

<p>A slightly more generalized way to teach Foolscap about third-party
classes is to register an <code class="API"
base="foolscap.copyable">ICopyable</code> adapter for them, using the usual
(i.e. zope.interface) adapter-registration mechanism. The object that provide
<code>ICopyable</code> needs to implement two methods:
<code>getTypeToCopy</code> (which returns the copytype), and
<code>getStateToCopy</code>, which returns the state dictionary. Any object
which can be adapted to <code>ICopyable</code> can be serialized this
way.</p>

<p>On the receiving side, the copytype is looked up in the
<code>CopyableRegistry</code> to find a corresponding UnslicerFactory. The
<code>registerRemoteCopyUnslicerFactory</code> function accepts two
arguments: the copytype, and the unslicer factory to use. This unslicer
factory is simply a function that takes no arguments and returns a new
Unslicer. Each time an inbound message with the matching copytype is
received, ths unslicer factory is invoked to create an Unslicer that will be
responsible for the single instance described in the message. This Unslicer
must implement an interface described in the <a
href="specifications/pb.html">Unslicer specifications</a>.</p>

<h2>Registering ISlicer adapters</h2>

<p>The most generalized way to serialize classes is to register a whole
<code>ISlicer</code> adapter for them. The <code>ISlicer</code> gets complete
control over serialization: it can stall the production of tokens by
implementing a <code>slice</code> method that yields Deferreds instead of
basic objects. It can also interact with other objects while the target is
being serialized. As an extreme example, if you had a service that wanted to
migrate an open HTTP connection from one process to another, the
<code>ISlicer</code> could communication with a front-end load-balancing box
to redirect the connection to the new host. In this case, the slicer could
theoretically tell the load-balancer to pause the connection and assign it a
rendezvous number, then serialize this rendezvous number as a form of "claim
check" to the target process. The <code>IUnslicer</code> on the receiving end
could open a new listening port, then use the claim check to tell the
load-balancer to direct the connection to this new port. Likewise two
services running on the same host could conspire to pass open file
descriptors over a Foolscap connection (via an auxilliary unix-domain socket)
through suitable magic in the <code>ISlicer</code> and <code>IUnslicer</code>
on each end.</p>

<p>The Slicers and Unslicers are described in more detail in the <a
href="specifications/pb.html">specifications</a>.</p>

<p>Note that a <code>Copyable</code> with a copytype of "foo" is serialized
as the following token stream: OPEN, "copyable", "foo", [state dictionary..],
CLOSE. Any <code>ISlicer</code> adapter which wishes to match what
<code>Copyable</code> does needs to include the extra "copyable" opentype
string first.</p>

<p>Also note that using a custom Slicer introduces an opportunity to violate
serialization coherency. <code>Copyable</code> and Copiers transform the
original object into a state dictionary in one swell foop, not allowing any
other code to get control (and possibly mutate the object's state). If your
custom Slicer allows other code to get control during serialization, then the
object's state might be changed, and thus the serialized state dictionary
could wind up looking pretty weird.</p>


</body></html>
