.TH GRID-MANAGER 1 "March 2025" "Tahoe-LAFS" "User Commands"
.
.SH NAME
grid-manager \- A Tahoe Grid Manager for issuing certificates to storage-servers.
.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B grid-manager
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] \fICOMMAND\fR [\fIARGS\fR]...
.
.SH DESCRIPTION
A Tahoe Grid Manager issues certificates to storage-servers.
.
A Tahoe client with one or more Grid Manager public keys configured will only upload to a Storage Server that presents a valid certificate signed by one of the configured Grid Manager keys.
.
Grid Manager configuration can be in a local directory or given via stdin. It contains long-term secret information (a private signing key) and should be kept safe.
.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \f[B]-c,\ --config\ \fIPATH\fR
Configuration directory (or - for stdin). \fIRequired.\fR
.TP
.B \f[B]--help
Show this message and exit.
.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B add
Add a new storage-server by name to a Grid Manager.
.TP
.B create
Make a new Grid Manager.
.TP
.B list
List all storage-servers known to a Grid Manager.
.TP
.B public-identity
Show the public identity key of a Grid Manager.
.TP
.B remove
Remove an existing storage-server by name from a Grid Manager.
.TP
.B sign
Sign a new certificate.
.
.SH AUTHORS
Grid Manager has been written by meejah.
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS has been written by Brian Warner, Zooko Wilcox-O'Hearn, and numerous other contributors.
.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Please see
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.org/trac/tahoe-lafs/wiki/HowToReportABug
.UE
.
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS home page:
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.org/
.UE
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS development mailing list:
.UR https://lists.tahoe-lafs.org/mailman/listinfo/tahoe-dev
.UE
.
.SH COPYRIGHT
Copyright \(co 2006\(en2025 The Tahoe-LAFS Software Foundation.
.
.SH SEE ALSO
.MR tahoe 1
.PP
The Tahoe-LAFS documentation on Grid Managers has more detail than this manual page:
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/managed-grid.html
.UE
.PP
It includes a step-by-step tutorial on how to set up a managed grid:
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.readthedocs.io/en/latest/managed-grid.html#example-setup-of-a-new-managed-grid
.UE
