.TH TAHOE 1 "April 2025" "Tahoe-LAFS \[em] tahoe command" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
tahoe \- Secure distributed file store.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B tahoe
[\fI\,global-options\/\fR] \fI\,<command> \/\fR[\fI\,command-options\/\fR]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Tahoe-LAFS offers provider-independent security
for your data.  You don't have to trust storage
nodes for confidentiality or integrity - both are
provided through cryptography.
Additionally, Tahoe-LAFS can help with availability
and anonymity (but cannot guarantee either by itself).
.sp
The "tahoe" executable can be used to create and
manage client/server nodes, manipulate the file
store, and perform several debugging/maintenance
tasks.
.sp
Please have a look at the `SEE ALSO' section at
the end of this manual page for pointers to
further instructions.
.
.SH GLOBAL OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-d\fR, \fB\-\-node\-directory=\fR
Specify which Tahoe node directory should be
used. The directory should either contain a
full Tahoe node, or a file named node.url that
points to some other Tahoe node. It should also
contain a file named 'private/aliases' which
contains the mapping from alias name to root
dirnode URI. [default for most commands:
\&`$HOME/.tahoe']
.TP
\fB\-\-eliot\-destination=\fR
Add an Eliot logging destination.  May be given
more than once.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\fR
Display help and exit.
.TP
\fB\-\-help\-eliot\-destinations\fR
Emit usage information for \fB\-\-eliot\-destination\fR.
.TP
.B \f[B]-q,\ --quiet\f[]
Operate silently.
.TP
.B \f[B]-V,\ --version\f[]
Display version numbers.
.TP
\fB\-\-wormhole\-invite\-appid=\fR
The appid to use on the wormhole server.
[default: tahoe\-lafs.org/invite]
.TP
\fB\-\-wormhole\-server=\fR
The magic wormhole server to use. [default:
ws://wormhole.tahoe\-lafs.org:4000/v1]
.SH COMMANDS
.PP
The \f[B]tahoe\f[] runner can be used for various tasks depending
on the command used:
.PP
tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]NODEDIR\f[]]
.SH ADMINISTRATION
.SS COMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]create-node\f[]
Create a node that acts as a client, server or both.
.TP
.B \f[B]create-client\f[]
Create a client node (providing storage to others initially disabled).
.TP
.B \f[B]create-introducer\f[]
Create an introducer node.
When the grid is large or very dynamic, introducers make it easier for clients to connect.
See "Static Server Definitions" in the documentation on how to configure clients to connect to one or more storage servers without using an introdcuer.
.TP
.B \f[B]invite\f[]
Invite a new node to a grid.
See "Magic Wormhole Invites" in the documentation.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]-C,\ --basedir=\f[]
Same as the global --node-directory option.
.TP
.B \f[B]-n,\ --nickname=\f[]
Specify the nickname for this node (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]-i,\ --introducer=\f[]
Specify the introducer FURL to use (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]--hostname=\f[]
Hostname to automatically set --location/--port when
--listen=tcp (the default).
.TP
.B \f[B]-p,\ --webport=\f[]
Specify which TCP port to run the HTTP interface on.
Use `none' to disable.
Default: `tcp:3456:interface=127.0.0.1' (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]--no-storage\f[]
Do not offer storage service to other nodes (\f[B]create-node\f[]
only).
.SH CONTROLLING NODES
.SS COMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]run\f[]
Run a node without daemonizing.
This is the only command for running nodes.
In the past, tahoe offered service watching internally (with start, restart,
stop commands), but this was and not very portable and has been
deprecated.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]--allow-stdin-close\f[]
Do not exit when stdin closes ("tahoe run" otherwise will exit).
This is required for some service runners (like systemd, for example).
.TP
.B \f[B]-C,\ --basedir=\f[]
Same as the global --node-directory option.
.TP
.B \f[B]--help\f[]
Display help and exit.  This includes lots of `twistd-options' for debugging,
logging, profiling, et cetera that are left out of this manual page for
brevity.
.SH USING THE FILE STORE
.PP
Please run `tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] --help' for more details on each
command.
.SS COMMANDS
.B \f[B]mkdir\f[]
Create a directory and return its directory capability ("dircap").
.TP
.B \f[B]add-alias\f[]
Add an alias for an existing cap.
.TP
.B \f[B]create-alias\f[]
Create an alias pointing to a new cap.
.TP
.B \f[B]list-aliases\f[]
List all alias caps.
.TP
.B \f[B]ls\f[]
List a directory.
.TP
.B \f[B]get\f[]
Retrieve a file from the grid.
.TP
.B \f[B]put\f[]
Upload a file into the grid.
.TP
.B \f[B]cp\f[]
Copy one or more files or directories.
.TP
.B \f[B]unlink\f[]
Unlink a file or directory on the grid.
.TP
.B \f[B]rm\f[]
Unlink a file or directory on the grid (same as \f[B]unlink\f[]).
.TP
.B \f[B]mv\f[]
Move a file within the grid.
.TP
.B \f[B]ln\f[]
Make an additional link to an existing file or directory.
.TP
.B \f[B]backup\f[]
Make target dir look like local dir.
.TP
.B \f[B]webopen\f[]
Open a web browser to a grid file or directory.
.TP
.B \f[B]manifest\f[]
List all files/directories in a subtree.
.TP
.B \f[B]stats\f[]
Print statistics about all files/directories in a subtree.
.TP
.B \f[B]check\f[]
Check a single file or directory.
.TP
.B \f[B]deep-check\f[]
Check all files/directories reachable from a starting point
.SH DEBUGGING
.PP
tahoe debug \f[I]SUBCOMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]PARAMETER\f[]]...
.sp
Please run e.g.\ `tahoe debug dump-share --help' for more
details on each subcommand.
.SS SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]dump-share\f[]
Unpack and display the contents of a share.
.TP
.B \f[B]dump-cap\f[]
Unpack a read-cap or write-cap.
.TP
.B \f[B]find-shares\f[]
Locate sharefiles in node directories.
.TP
.B \f[B]catalog-shares\f[]
Describe all shares in node dirs.
.TP
.B \f[B]corrupt-share\f[]
Corrupt a share by flipping a bit.
.TP
.B \f[B]flogtool\f[]
Utilities to access log files.
.SH AUTHORS
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS has been written by Brian Warner, Zooko Wilcox-O'Hearn
and dozens of others.
This manpage was originally written by bertagaz.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.PP
Please see
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.org/trac/tahoe-lafs/wiki/HowToReportABug
.UE .
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS home page: <https://tahoe-lafs.org/>
.PP
tahoe-dev mailing list:
.UR https://lists.tahoe-lafs.org/mailman/listinfo/tahoe-dev
.UE
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
Copyright \(co 2006\(en2025 The Tahoe-LAFS Software Foundation.
.SH "SEE ALSO"
Run 'tahoe \fB\-\-help\fR' for an overview of
commands and 'tahoe <command> \fB\-\-help\fR' for
more details on each command.
.sp
See
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.readthedocs.io/en/tahoe-lafs-1.20.0/frontends/CLI.html
.UE
for user documentation specific to the 'tahoe'
command.
.sp
See
.UR https://tahoe-lafs.readthedocs.io/
.UE
for "the documentation" - in-depth, longer-form
explanations, specifications and step-by-step
tutorials.
.sp
