.TH TAHOE 1 "July 2011" "Tahoe-LAFS \[em] tahoe command" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
.PP
tahoe - Secure distributed filesystem.
.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]PARAMETER\f[]]...
.SH GENERAL OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]-q,\ --quiet\f[]
Operate silently.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]-V,\ --version\f[]
Display version numbers.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]--version-and-path\f[]
Display version numbers and paths to their locations.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]-d,\ --node-directory\f[]
Specify which Tahoe node directory should be used.
(default for most commands: `$HOME/.tahoe')
.RS
.RE
.SH COMMANDS
.PP
The \f[B]tahoe\f[] runner can be used for various tasks depending
on the command used.
.SS ADMINISTRATION
.PP
tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]NODEDIR\f[]]
.RS
.SS COMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]create-node\f[]
Create a node that acts as a client, server or both.
.TP
.B \f[B]create-client\f[]
Create a client node (with storage initially disabled).
.TP
.B \f[B]create-introducer\f[]
Create an introducer node.
.TP
.B \f[B]create-key-generator\f[]
Create a key generator service.
.TP
.B \f[B]create-stats-gatherer\f[]
Create a stats-gatherer service.
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]-C,\ --basedir=\f[]
Same as \[em]node-directory.
.TP
.B \f[B]-d,\ --node-directory=\f[]
Specify which Tahoe node directory should be used.
(default for \f[B]create-node\f[] and \f[B]create-client\f[]:
`$HOME/.tahoe/').
.TP
.B \f[B]-n,\ --nickname=\f[]
Specify the nickname for this node (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]-i,\ --introducer=\f[]
Specify the introducer FURL to use (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]-p,\ --webport=\f[]
Specify which TCP port to run the HTTP interface on.
Use `none' to disable.
Default: `tcp:3456:interface=127.0.0.1' (\f[B]create-node\f[] and
\f[B]create-client\f[] only).
.TP
.B \f[B]--no-storage\f[]
Do not offer storage service to other nodes (\f[B]create-node\f[]
only).
.RE
.SS CONTROLLING NODES
.PP
tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]NODEDIR\f[]]
.SS COMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]start\f[]
Start a node (of any type).
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]stop\f[]
Stop a node.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]restart\f[]
Restart a node.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]run\f[]
Run a node synchronously.
.RS
.RE
.SS OPTIONS
.TP
.B \f[B]-p,\ --profile\f[]
Run under the Python profiler, putting results in
`profiling_results.prof' (use with \f[B]start\f[] or
\f[B]restart\f[] only).
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]--syslog\f[]
Tell the node to log to syslog, not a file (use with \f[B]start\f[]
or \f[B]restart\f[] only).
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]-C,\ --basedir=\f[]
Same as \[em]node-directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]-d,\ --node-directory=\f[]
Specify which Tahoe node directory should be used (default for commands
other than \f[B]run\f[]: `$HOME/.tahoe/').
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]--help\f[]
Display help and exit
.RS
.RE
.SS USING THE FILSYSTEM
.TP
.B \f[B]mkdir\f[]
Create a new directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]add-alias\f[]
Add a new alias cap.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]create-alias\f[]
Create a new alias cap.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]list-aliases\f[]
List all alias caps.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]ls\f[]
List a directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]get\f[]
Retrieve a file from the grid.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]put\f[]
Upload a file into the grid.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]cp\f[]
Copy one or more files or directories.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]unlink\f[]
Unlink a file or directory on the grid.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]rm\f[]
Unlink a file or directory on the grid (same as \f[B]unlink\f[]).
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]mv\f[]
Move a file within the grid.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]ln\f[]
Make an additional link to an existing file or directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]backup\f[]
Make target dir look like local dir.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]webopen\f[]
Open a web browser to a grid file or directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]manifest\f[]
List all files/directories in a subtree.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]stats\f[]
Print statistics about all files/directories in a subtree.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]check\f[]
Check a single file or directory.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]deep-check\f[]
Check all files/directories reachable from a starting point
.RS
.RE
.SS OPTIONS
.PP
Please run `tahoe \f[I]COMMAND\f[] --help' for more details on each
command.
.SS DEBUGGING
.PP
tahoe debug \f[I]SUBCOMMAND\f[] [\f[I]OPTION\f[]]... [\f[I]PARAMETER\f[]]...
.SS SUBCOMMANDS
.TP
.B \f[B]dump-share\f[]
Unpack and display the contents of a share.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]dump-cap\f[]
Unpack a read-cap or write-cap.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]find-shares\f[]
Locate sharefiles in node directories.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]catalog-shares\f[]
Describe all shares in node dirs.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]corrupt-share\f[]
Corrupt a share by flipping a bit.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]repl\f[]
Open a Python interpreter.
.RS
.RE
.TP
.B \f[B]trial\f[]
Run tests using Twisted Trial with the right imports.
.RS
.RE
.PP
Please run e.g.\ `tahoe debug dump-share --help' for more
details on each subcommand.
.SH AUTHORS
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS has been written by Brian Warner, Zooko Wilcox-O'Hearn
and dozens of others.
This manpage was originally written by bertagaz.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
.PP
Please see <http://tahoe-lafs.org/trac/tahoe-lafs/wiki/HowToReportABug>.
.PP
For known security issues see
<http://tahoe-lafs.org/trac/tahoe-lafs/browser/docs/known_issues.rst>.
.PP
Tahoe-LAFS home page: <http://tahoe-lafs.org/>
.PP
tahoe-dev mailing list: <http://tahoe-lafs.org/cgi-bin/mailman/listinfo/tahoe-dev>
.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
2006\[en]2011 \@ AllMyData, Inc.

